README.md, before:

# aico

A command-line tool for scripting AI-driven code edits.

`aico` is built to integrate Large Language Models into a traditional, terminal-based development workflow. It reads local files, takes a prompt, and produces a standard diff. It is designed to be a predictable and composable part of your existing toolchain.

## Installation

Install `aico` using `uv`:

```bash
uv tool install --from git+https://github.com/jurriaan/aico/ aico
```

## Philosophy

`aico` is guided by a few core principles that differentiate it from chat-based assistants.

- **It's a Tool, Not an Agent.** It is a command-line utility that transforms text. It takes files and instructions as input and produces diffs or raw text as output. Its behavior is designed to be as predictable as `grep` or `sed`.

- **Built for Composition.** One of the primary outputs of `aico` is a clean, standard unified diff printed to `stdout`. This allows it to be piped directly into other powerful command-line tools you already use.

  ```bash
  # Generate a diff and pipe it directly to git to apply it
  aico prompt --mode diff "Implement Increment 1 of the plan" | git apply

  # Or review the last generated diff with a modern diffing tool like delta
  aico last | delta
  ```

- **Transparent State.** There is no hidden state or magic. The entire session—context files, chat history, and model configuration—is stored in a single, human-readable `.ai_session.json` file in your project's root. You can inspect it, edit it, or even version-control it.

- **Focused on Code Modification.** The tool is optimized for its `diff` mode, which produces structured `SEARCH/REPLACE` patches. This makes it ideal for refactoring, adding features, or fixing bugs directly from your terminal.

## Features

- **Streaming Output:** See the AI's response in real-time. In `diff` mode, watch as diffs are generated and rendered in-place.
- **Context Management:** Explicitly `add` and `drop` files to control exactly what the AI sees.
- **History Control:** Easily manage how much of the conversation history is included in the next prompt to balance context-awareness with cost.
- **Cost and Token Tracking:** See token usage and estimated cost for each interaction.
- **Editor-Agnostic:** Because it's a CLI tool, `aico` works with any code editor, from Vim to VSCode.

## Recommended Workflow: Plan and Execute

The most effective way to use `aico` is to first collaborate with the AI on a plan, and then ask it to execute each step of that plan.

1. **Initialize a session in your project root.**

   ```bash
   aico init --model "openrouter/google/gemini-2.5-pro"
   ```

1. **Add files to the AI's context.**

   ```bash
   aico add src/utils.py src/main.py
   ```

1. **(Optional) Check the context size and cost.** Before sending a complex prompt, you can see how large the context will be and the estimated cost.

   ```bash
   aico tokens
   ```

1. **Plan the work. Start a conversation with the AI to create a plan.**

   ```bash
   aico prompt "Propose a multi-increment, test-driven plan to refactor the 'hello' function in main.py. It should accept a 'name' argument and print a greeting."
   ```

   The AI will respond with a numbered plan. This starts a conversation that becomes part of the session history.

1. **Execute one step. Ask the AI to write the code for the first increment.**

   ```bash
   aico prompt --mode diff "Implement Increment 1 of the plan."
   ```

   `aico` will stream a response, ending with a proposed diff.

1. **Review and apply.**

   ```bash
   # Review the diff from the last command with a tool like delta
   aico last | delta

   # If the patch is correct, apply it
   aico last | git apply

   # Made a mistake? Undo the 3rd to last change by reversing its diff.
   aico last 3 | git apply --reverse
   ```

Repeat steps 5 and 6 for each increment of the plan.

## Commands Overview

- `aico init`: Creates a `.ai_session.json` file in the current directory.
- `aico add <files...>`: Adds one or more files to the session context.
- `aico drop <files...>`: Removes one or more files from the context.
- `aico tokens`: Shows a breakdown of token usage and estimated cost for the current context.
- `aico prompt "<instruction>"`: Sends the context and prompt to the AI. By default, this starts a conversation for planning and discussion.
  - `--mode diff`: The AI responds with code edits; output is a unified diff.
- `aico last [N]`: Shows the N-th to last response from the AI (defaults to 1).
  - `--recompute`: Recalculates the response against the current state of files.
  - `--verbatim`: Prints the original, unprocessed response from the AI.
- `aico history`: A subcommand group for managing the chat history.
  - `aico history view`: See the current status of the history.
  - `aico history set <index>`: Set which message the active history starts from.
  - `aico history reset`: Reset the history to include all messages.
- **Addons**: `aico` can be extended with custom scripts. Any executable script in `./.aico/addons` or `~/.config/aico/addons` will be available as a subcommand. Addons are automatically listed in the `aico --help` output.

Commit message:

fix(addons): add commit script
The commit addon script has been added to the repository as a project-level addon found in `.aico/addons/commit`. This script leverages the `--passthrough` option of `aico prompt` to generate Conventional Commit messages for staged git changes.

It allows for self-contained configuration of the LLM model and co-authors directly within the script, with the primary author defaulting to the user's git configuration. The script uses `git diff` and `git log` to gather context, constructs a detailed prompt using `aico`'s structured format, and then pipes the AI-generated message to `git commit --file - --edit` for review.

README.md, after:

# aico

A command-line tool for scripting AI-driven code edits.

`aico` is built to integrate Large Language Models into a traditional, terminal-based development workflow. It reads local files, takes a prompt, and produces a standard diff. It is designed to be a predictable and composable part of your existing toolchain.

## Installation

Install `aico` using `uv`:

```bash
uv tool install --from git+https://github.com/jurriaan/aico/ aico
```

## Philosophy

`aico` is guided by a few core principles that differentiate it from chat-based assistants.

- **It's a Tool, Not an Agent.** It is a command-line utility that transforms text. It takes files and instructions as input and produces diffs or raw text as output. Its behavior is designed to be as predictable as `grep` or `sed`.

- **Built for Composition.** One of the primary outputs of `aico` is a clean, standard unified diff printed to `stdout`. This allows it to be piped directly into other powerful command-line tools you already use.

  ```bash
  # Generate a diff and pipe it directly to git to apply it
  aico prompt --mode diff "Implement Increment 1 of the plan" | git apply

  # Or review the last generated diff with a modern diffing tool like delta
  aico last | delta
  ```

- **Transparent State.** There is no hidden state or magic. The entire session—context files, chat history, and model configuration—is stored in a single, human-readable `.ai_session.json` file in your project's root. You can inspect it, edit it, or even version-control it.

- **Focused on Code Modification.** The tool is optimized for its `diff` mode, which produces structured `SEARCH/REPLACE` patches. This makes it ideal for refactoring, adding features, or fixing bugs directly from your terminal.

## Features

- **Streaming Output:** See the AI's response in real-time. In `diff` mode, watch as diffs are generated and rendered in-place.
- **Context Management:** Explicitly `add` and `drop` files to control exactly what the AI sees.
- **History Control:** Easily manage how much of the conversation history is included in the next prompt to balance context-awareness with cost.
- **Cost and Token Tracking:** See token usage and estimated cost for each interaction.
- **Editor-Agnostic:** Because it's a CLI tool, `aico` works with any code editor, from Vim to VSCode.

## Recommended Workflow: Plan and Execute

The most effective way to use `aico` is to first collaborate with the AI on a plan, and then ask it to execute each step of that plan.

1. **Initialize a session in your project root.**

   ```bash
   aico init --model "openrouter/google/gemini-2.5-pro"
   ```

1. **Add files to the AI's context.**

   ```bash
   aico add src/utils.py src/main.py
   ```

1. **(Optional) Check the context size and cost.** Before sending a complex prompt, you can see how large the context will be and the estimated cost.

   ```bash
   aico tokens
   ```

1. **Plan the work. Start a conversation with the AI to create a plan.**

   ```bash
   aico prompt "Propose a multi-increment, test-driven plan to refactor the 'hello' function in main.py. It should accept a 'name' argument and print a greeting."
   ```

   The AI will respond with a numbered plan. This starts a conversation that becomes part of the session history.

1. **Execute one step. Ask the AI to write the code for the first increment.**

   ```bash
   aico prompt --mode diff "Implement Increment 1 of the plan."
   ```

   `aico` will stream a response, ending with a proposed diff.

1. **Review and apply.**

   ```bash
   # Review the diff from the last command with a tool like delta
   aico last | delta

   # If the patch is correct, apply it
   aico last | git apply

   # Made a mistake? Undo the 3rd to last change by reversing its diff.
   aico last 3 | git apply --reverse
   ```

Repeat steps 5 and 6 for each increment of the plan.

## Commands Overview

- `aico init`: Creates a `.ai_session.json` file in the current directory.
- `aico add <files...>`: Adds one or more files to the session context.
- `aico drop <files...>`: Removes one or more files from the context.
- `aico tokens`: Shows a breakdown of token usage and estimated cost for the current context.
- `aico prompt "<instruction>"`: Sends the context and prompt to the AI. By default, this starts a conversation for planning and discussion.
  - `--mode diff`: The AI responds with code edits; output is a unified diff.
- `aico last [N]`: Shows the N-th to last response from the AI (defaults to 1).
  - `--recompute`: Recalculates the response against the current state of files.
  - `--verbatim`: Prints the original, unprocessed response from the AI.
- `aico history`: A subcommand group for managing the chat history.
  - `aico history view`: See the current status of the history.
  - `aico history set <index>`: Set which message the active history starts from.
  - `aico history reset`: Reset the history to include all messages.

## Addons: Extending `aico`

You can extend `aico` with your own custom commands using a simple addon system. Any executable script placed in one of the addon directories will automatically become available as a subcommand. `aico` searches for addons in the following order:

1.  **Project-level addons**: `./.aico/addons/`
2.  **User-level addons**: `~/.config/aico/addons/`

Addons are discovered at runtime and listed in the `aico --help` output. Project-level addons take precedence over user-level addons with the same name.

An addon can provide its own help text, which will be shown in the main help output. For a powerful example of how to create an addon, see the `commit` script included in this repository. It uses `aico` to generate Conventional Commit messages from your staged changes.
