docs/tutorial_basics.md, before:

# Getting Started

This tutorial walks you through the core workflow of `aico`: planning, implementing, and refining code with an LLM.

## 1. Initialization

Start by initializing a session in your project root. We specify the model we want to use.

```console
$ aico init --model "openai/test-model"
Initialized session file: .ai_session.json
$
```

## 2. Context & Understanding

Start by defining the context boundary. We add a file and verify the model understands it.

```console
$ echo "def add(a, b): return a + b" > math.py
$ aico add math.py
Added file to context: math.py
$ aico ask "Explain this code"
This code is a Python script.
Tokens: 10 sent, 5 received. Cost: $0.02, current chat: $0.02
$
```

## 3. Directed Execution (Generating Diff)

Now, we direct the model to modify the source. We use `gen` to produce a standard Unified Diff.

```console
$ aico gen "Rename 'add' to 'sum_values' and add type hints"
--- a/math.py
+++ b/math.py
@@ -1 +1,2 @@
-def add(a, b): return a + b
+def sum_values(a: int, b: int) -> int:
+    return a + b
Tokens: 10 sent, 5 received. Cost: $0.02, current chat: $0.04
$
```

## 4. Manual Corrections (The Learning Loop)

Sometimes the model makes a small mistake, or you simply change your mind. Instead of just fixing the file, you should fix the **history**. This ensures the model "remembers" your correction for future turns.

We use `aico edit` to modify the last LLM response.

*(Note: In this example, we use `sed` to simulate an editor. In reality, `aico edit` opens your default `$EDITOR`.)*

```console
$ env EDITOR="sed -i s/sum_values/calc_sum/" aico edit
Updated response for message pair 1.
$
```

Now we apply the corrected patch.

```console
$ aico last | patch -p1
patching file math.py
$ grep "def calc_sum" math.py
def calc_sum(a: int, b: int) -> int:
$
```

## 5. Transparency and Status
Verify context files and token usage with the `status` command.

```console
$ aico log
                       Active Context Log                       
 ID  Role       Message Snippet                                 
  0  user       Explain this code                               
     assistant  This code is a Python script.                   
  1  user       Rename 'add' to 'sum_values' and add type hints 
     assistant  File: math.py                                   
$ aico drop math.py
Dropped file from context: math.py
$ aico status
╭─────────────────────────────── Session 'main' ───────────────────────────────╮
│                              openai/test-model                               │
╰──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯

    Tokens       Cost Component                                                 
 (approx.)                                                                      
────────── ────────── ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
       408   $0.40800 system prompt                                             
       395   $0.39500 alignment prompts (worst-case)                            
        58   $0.05800 chat history                                              
                         └─ Active window: 2 pairs (IDs 0-1), 2 sent.           
                      (Use `aico log`, `undo`, and `set-history` to manage)     
────────── ────────── ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
      ~861   $0.86100 Total                                                     

╭─────────────────────────────── Context Window ───────────────────────────────╮
│                     (861 of 1,000 used - 14% remaining)                      │
│ ━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━            │
╰──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
$
```

## 6. History Management (Undo/Redo)
`aico` uses a "soft-delete" approach to history. You can exclude messages from the next prompt without losing them from the log.

```console
$ aico undo
Marked pair at index 1 as excluded.
$ aico log
                        Active Context Log                        
   ID  Role       Message Snippet                                 
    0  user       Explain this code                               
       assistant  This code is a Python script.                   
 1[-]  user       Rename 'add' to 'sum_values' and add type hints 
       assistant  File: math.py                                   
$ aico redo
Re-included pair at index 1 in context.
$
```

## 7. Archiving and Resetting (Summarize)
The `summarize` addon archives the history and resets the active window.

```console
$ aico summarize #=> --regex .*Archived summary.*
$ aico status
╭─────────────────────────────── Session 'main' ───────────────────────────────╮
│                              openai/test-model                               │
╰──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯

    Tokens       Cost Component                                                 
 (approx.)                                                                      
────────── ────────── ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
       408   $0.40800 system prompt                                             
       395   $0.39500 alignment prompts (worst-case)                            
         0   $0.00000 chat history                                              
────────── ────────── ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
        50   $0.05000 PROJECT_SUMMARY.md                                        
────────── ────────── ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
      ~853   $0.85300 Total                                                     

╭─────────────────────────────── Context Window ───────────────────────────────╮
│                     (853 of 1,000 used - 15% remaining)                      │
│ ━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━             │
╰──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
$ cat PROJECT_SUMMARY.md
### Recent Developments
- Refactored `math.py` to use type hints.
### Comprehensive Project Summary
A collection of utilities including math functions.
$
```
```

Commit message:

docs: add guide for git commit automation
Introduces `docs/addon_commit.md` which explains how `aico` generates Conventional Commit messages using staged diffs, chat history, and git logs for context. Also standardizes header casing across existing guides and updates the tutorial with details on the context tracking mechanism.

docs/tutorial_basics.md, after:

# Getting started

This tutorial walks you through the core workflow of `aico`: planning, implementing, and refining code with an LLM.

## 1. Initialization

Start by initializing a session in your project root. We specify the model we want to use.

```console
$ aico init --model "openai/test-model"
Initialized session file: .ai_session.json
$
```

## 2. Context & understanding

Start by defining the context boundary. We add a file and verify the model understands it.

```console
$ echo "def add(a, b): return a + b" > math.py
$ aico add math.py
Added file to context: math.py
$ aico ask "Explain this code"
This code is a Python script.
Tokens: 10 sent, 5 received. Cost: $0.02, current chat: $0.02
$
```

**How context works**
When you add a file, `aico` tracks its path, not its content. Every time you run `ask` or `gen`, the tool reads the current state of the file from disk.

It structures this context based on modification times:

* **Ground Truth**: Files unmodified since the start of the session are placed at the beginning of the prompt to establish a baseline.
* **Chronological Updates**: Files modified during the session are spliced into the history log at the point they were changed.

This ensures the LLM sees the code exactly as it exists on your disk right now, preserving the chronological flow of changes.

## 3. Generating diffs

Now, we direct the model to modify the source. We use `gen` to produce a standard Unified Diff.

```console
$ aico gen "Rename 'add' to 'sum_values' and add type hints"
--- a/math.py
+++ b/math.py
@@ -1 +1,2 @@
-def add(a, b): return a + b
+def sum_values(a: int, b: int) -> int:
+    return a + b
Tokens: 10 sent, 5 received. Cost: $0.02, current chat: $0.04
$
```

## 4. Manual corrections

Sometimes the model makes a small mistake, or you simply change your mind. Instead of just fixing the file, you should fix the **history**. This ensures the model "remembers" your correction for future turns.

We use `aico edit` to modify the last LLM response.

*(Note: In this example, we use `sed` to simulate an editor. In reality, `aico edit` opens your default `$EDITOR`.)*

```console
$ env EDITOR="sed -i s/sum_values/calc_sum/" aico edit
Updated response for message pair 1.
$
```

Now we apply the corrected patch.

```console
$ aico last | patch -p1
patching file math.py
$ grep "def calc_sum" math.py
def calc_sum(a: int, b: int) -> int:
$
```

## 5. Checking the context

Verify context files and token usage with the `status` command.

```console
$ aico log
                       Active Context Log                       
 ID  Role       Message Snippet                                 
  0  user       Explain this code                               
     assistant  This code is a Python script.                   
  1  user       Rename 'add' to 'sum_values' and add type hints 
     assistant  File: math.py                                   
$ aico drop math.py
Dropped file from context: math.py
$ aico status
╭─────────────────────────────── Session 'main' ───────────────────────────────╮
│                              openai/test-model                               │
╰──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯

    Tokens       Cost Component                                                 
 (approx.)                                                                      
────────── ────────── ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
       408   $0.40800 system prompt                                             
       395   $0.39500 alignment prompts (worst-case)                            
        58   $0.05800 chat history                                              
                         └─ Active window: 2 pairs (IDs 0-1), 2 sent.           
                      (Use `aico log`, `undo`, and `set-history` to manage)     
────────── ────────── ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
      ~861   $0.86100 Total                                                     

╭─────────────────────────────── Context Window ───────────────────────────────╮
│                     (861 of 1,000 used - 14% remaining)                      │
│ ━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━            │
╰──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
$
```

## 6. History management (undo/redo)

`aico` uses a "soft-delete" approach to history. You can exclude messages from the next prompt without losing them from the log.

```console
$ aico undo
Marked pair at index 1 as excluded.
$ aico log
                        Active Context Log                        
   ID  Role       Message Snippet                                 
    0  user       Explain this code                               
       assistant  This code is a Python script.                   
 1[-]  user       Rename 'add' to 'sum_values' and add type hints 
       assistant  File: math.py                                   
$ aico redo
Re-included pair at index 1 in context.
$
```

## 7. Archiving and resetting (summarize)

The `summarize` addon archives the history and resets the active window.

```console
$ aico summarize #=> --regex Archived summary
### Comprehensive Project Summary
A collection of utilities including math functions.

History context cleared.
Added file to context: PROJECT_SUMMARY.md
Archived summary to $TIMESTAMP_PROJECT_SUMMARY.md and reset active history
$ aico status
╭─────────────────────────────── Session 'main' ───────────────────────────────╮
│                              openai/test-model                               │
╰──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯

    Tokens       Cost Component                                                 
 (approx.)                                                                      
────────── ────────── ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
       408   $0.40800 system prompt                                             
       395   $0.39500 alignment prompts (worst-case)                            
         0   $0.00000 chat history                                              
────────── ────────── ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
        50   $0.05000 PROJECT_SUMMARY.md                                        
────────── ────────── ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
      ~853   $0.85300 Total                                                     

╭─────────────────────────────── Context Window ───────────────────────────────╮
│                     (853 of 1,000 used - 15% remaining)                      │
│ ━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━             │
╰──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
$ cat PROJECT_SUMMARY.md
### Recent Developments
- Refactored `math.py` to use type hints.
### Comprehensive Project Summary
A collection of utilities including math functions.
$
```
